
WON FRE

SRE Re BES

Peach eR et

261

CONSIDERATIONS OF THE EFFECT OF VIOL DOWNWASH
ON THE GROUND ENVIRONMENT
By Thomas C. O'Bryan

Langley Research Center

This paper will consider VTOL downwash from the standpoint of
ground erosion and movement of objects to determine the present status
of the downwash problen.

The first problem which will be considered is the erosion effect
of the downwash. Figure 1 indicates the dynamic pressure required to
start erosion for a number of ground surfaces. This information is a
summary of small-scale erosion tests reported in reference 1 except for
the example of loose crushed rock at 19 lb/sq ft. This example was
obtained from an incident with the Vertol VZ-2 operating over an area
covered with loose rock which resulted in damage to the airplane. All
data shown in figure 1 were obtained with the use of cold jets. Since
sod withstands erosion at dynamic pressures up to 1,000 lo/sq ft, opera-
tion of jet VTOL aircraft over this surface would appear feasible.
Landings of the Bell X-14 and Short S.C.1 on sod have, in fact, verified
this feasibility. Experience indicates, however, that hot jets operating
over sod would eventually burn off the grass and dry out the soil with
resulting erosion.

The most serious effect of erosion arises when the dynamic pressure
is sufficient to dig a crater in the ground, a condition which is usually
imminent once erosion starts. The crater not only represents a source
of material to be recirculated, but in addition, the sides of the crater
provide a path for the eroded material to be projected vertically into
the rotor.

In addition to the crater problem, eroded material moving radially
may encounter large enough objects on the surface of the ground to project
them vertically into the rotor or onto the airframe.

The flow field around a hovering aircraft determines the extent of
the area to which these considerations apply. A schematic illustration
of the flow field is shown in figure 2. The presence of the ground turns
the flow from a vertical to a horizontal direction, and it is this flow
of air parallel to the ground which is of concern. Measurements of the
dynamic pressure of the outward flow of air were made with a vertically
traversing pitot head at several radial distances from the center of the
rotor. The height of the rotor above the ground varied from about

Preceding page blank

oF

NEXT PAGE
262

1/3 diameter to 1 diameter, so the effect of rotor height on the flow
field is not considered significant.

Typical results of these surveys for a 35-foot rotor are shown in
figure 3. Shown in this figure is the variation of the ratio of dynamic

pressure to disk loading aa with height above the ground measured in

dfameters h/D. The data indicate a general geometric similarity of

the profiles and a decrease in maximum dynamic pressure as distance from
the rotor is increased. Inasmuch as these profiles indicate that the
height of this sheet of air is nearly constant, momentum considerations
would indicate that this decrease in dynamic pressure with increase in
distance from the rotor would be expected because as the radial distance
(the distance in all directions from the center of the rotor) increases,
the circumference of the sheet of air increases linearly with distance.
Therefore the flow area increases and continuity requires that the veloc-
ity must decrease. From these considerations it would be expected that
the dynamic pressure would decrease inversely as the square of the radial
distance.

A typical decay of the maximum dynamic pressure with increase in
distance from a rotor x/D is shown in figure 4. Here the ratio of
the maximum dynamic pressure divided by the disk loading is plotted as
a function of the radial distance for a full-scale 9.5-foot rotor and
for a 28-inch-diameter model and is compared with the calculations based
on the previous considerations. The actual decay is somewhat more rapid
than this simple estimate as a result of the mixing of the flow with the
still air above it and the friction with the ground beneath as the flow
moves away from the source.

These results have been presented nondimensionally; in the practical
case it is of interest to compare the actual q at a given distance
from the aircraft for different disk loadings. To facilitate this com-
parison model data have been scaled to full-scale disk loadings. In fig-
ure 5 the decay of maximum dynamic pressure of the air flowing along the
ground is compared for two 40,000-pound-gross-weight configurations, one
with a disk loading of 10 lb/sq ft and the other at half the diameter
with a disk loading of 40 1b/sq ft. The main feature to be noted here
is that at a reasonable distance from the center the maximum dynamic
pressure is equal for the two rotors. Except in the near vicinity of
the aircraft dynamic pressure is a function of gross weight or thrust
and not a function of disk loading. Moreover as indicated by the sketch
at the top of figure 5, the sheet of air flowing along the ground is
thinner for the smaller rotor. Figure 6 shows the distribution of
dynamic pressure with height above the ground for the two rotors at a
distance of 72 feet from the center. The greater depth of the fliow for
the large rotor indicates that in these regions where dynamic pressure

wonrrne

NEXT PAGE
L
1
4
2
9

is equal for the two rotors the large-diameter low-disk-loading machines
would produce larger overturning moments to objects under its influence
than would the smaller diameter high-disk-loading rotor. However, in
the area in the immediate vicinity of the aircraft the erosion problems
that may be encountered are a function of disk loading.

The discussion so far has dealt with single-rotor configurations.
When multiple rotors are used, interactions can exist which bring in
other considerations. Figure 7 is shown in order to discuss the effect
of the flow at the plane of symmetry that exists when the flow from two
rotors meet. The first point to be made is that the resulting vertical
flow of air under the fuselage provides a path for the products of ero-
sion to be recirculated. An example of this is the Vertol VZ-2 incident
mentioned previously. In this case the loose rock was projected by the
flow into the open fuselage, as well as into the propellers with con-
siderable resulting damage to the machine. It is expected that the
situation would have been less severe in the case of a closed fuselage.

Another feature of the flow in the plane of symmetry is that for
short distances ahead of and behind the airplane the meeting of the two
slipstreams results in an increase in the dynamic pressure of the air-
flow parallel to the ground. Figure 8 illustrates this effect using
model data scaled to full-scale disk loadings. Here is shown the con-
tour line for a constant dynamic pressure of 8 lo/sq ft around a two-
propeller configuration. This increase in dynamic pressure shows up as
the peak in the contour line ahead of the nose. Also shown is the con-
tour line for a constant dynamic pressure of 8 1b/sq ft that would be
obtained with a single rotor of the same disk loading. It can be seen
that for practical purposes there is little difference between these
contours. Thus the effects of the interaction of these two flows are
confined to the immediate vicinity of the airplane.

CONCLUSIONS

In conclusion, ground erosion becomes a serious problem as disk
loading is increased, and operating experience is needed to define the
tolerable limits.

The problems associated with increased disk loading are confined
to the immediate vicinity of the aircraft. Except for this area in
the vicinity of the aircraft the dynamic pressure of the outward flowing
sheet of air is dependent only on the gross weight of the aircraft.
Furthermore, the thickness of this outward flowing sheet of air decreases
directly with decreases in the diameter of the slipstream.


NEXT PAGE
264

REFERENCE

1. Kuhn, Richard E.: An Investigation To Determine Conditions Under
Which Downwash From VIOL Aircraft Will Start Surface Erosion From
Various Types of Terrain. NASA TN D-56, 1959.

von Fre


NEXT PAGE
Piao dainlk, Ghee Balai tet? ait

265

DYNAMIC PRESSURE REQUIRED TO START EROSION

SOD

WET SAND

20 30 40
DYNAMIC PRESSURE, LB/SQ FT

Figure 1

DOWNWASH FROM AN ISOLATED ROTOR

Figure 2


NEXT PAGE
DYNAMIC-PRESSURE PROFILE FOR_ISOLATED ROTOR MEASURED ON
RADIAL LINE FROM CENTER OF ROTATION

lia

COMPARISON OF ESTIMATED AND MEASURED
DYNAMIC -PRESSURE DECAY

—— — ESTIMATED
9° MODEL
Oo FULL- SCALE


NEXT PAGE
COMPARISON OF THE DECAY FOR TWO DISK LOADINGS
é W = 40,000 LB

TT
: A aN
——
EES

D=72FT
DISK LOADING = 10 LB/SQ FT

— CO 6 FT

r= DISK LOADING = 40 LB/SQ FT

D = 36 FT

40 80 120
DISTANCE FROM CENTER LINE, FT
Figure 5
THICKNESS OF DYNAMIC PRESSURE PROFILES

W = 40,000 LB; x = 72 FT

HEIGHT ABOVE
GROUND, h, FT

DYNAMIC PRESSURE q, LB/FT2

Figure 6

267

NEXT PAGE
Sas i dete h i) SRO tee ae ae

THREE-DIMENSIONAL SLIPSTREAM PATTERN

Figure 7

GROUND DYNAMIC PRESSURE CONTOUR
FOR HOVERING VTOL

DISK LOADING « 40 LB/FT@
ee TTA SINGLE
\ J ROTOR
CONTOUR FOR \ +36 FT
q= 8 LBIFT2 \


NEXT PAGE
